Pax Renaissance – 2nd Edition
Setup:
1.

2.
3.

4.
5.

6.

Give each player a banker+10 pawns of the banker’s colour.
Place a pawn of each colour on the banker’s coat of arms on the
map along the trade routes.
Give the first player 3 florins, the second 4 florins, the third 5
florins and the fourth 6 florins.
Prepare the East/West market: take 12 cards, shuffle the 2
comet cards into them and add (4 X number of players) on top of
them. The left-hand card is placed face down and the 5 cards to
its right are placed face up.
Block Timbuktu and Novgorod with the 2 black discs. Block Red
Sea and Spice Islands with 2 white discs.
Place in LONDON, PARIS, VIENNA, BUDA, TANA, TOLEDO,
VALENCIA, VENICE, CONSTANTINOPOLE and CAIRO knights and
rooks as shown on their city icons.
Place the kingdom cards or their locations next to the map
(“thrones”) with their yellow side face up. Place the 4 victory
cards with their INACTIVE side face up.

2 Actions per turn:
Up to twice per turn:
1.
Purchase - take a card from the market to your hand and put 1 florin on each
market card on its left. A card with a florin placed on the same turn cannot be
purchased. If market card space is empty, place the florin on the opposite card of
the column. You can never hold more than 2 cards in your hand.
2.
Play – place a card from your hand into the far side of the East/West tableau.
You may: a. activate the “one-shot” operation (bottom of card) and place the
knights/rooks/pawns (bottom of card) on the map, b. place the
knights/rooks/pawns (bottom of card) on the map, or c. none of these actions.
3.
Sell – discard a card from your tableau or from your hand and receive 2 florins.
Return king cards to the throne and receive 2 florins. Return married king+queen
cards to the throne and receive 4 florins. Remove bishops/rooks/knights/pawns
from a discarded card to the supply. Bishops/rooks/knights/pawns on a kingdom
card (“repressed”) go with it to the throne. If a suzerain king is sold and returns
to the throne, all his vassal king cards return to their own thrones. A vassal king
card can be sold for 2 florins.
Up to once per turn:
1.
2.
3.

Victory:
Winning by completing the conditions on an ACTIVE victory card. If no
victory card is won and the market cannot be refreshed by either deck,
the player with the most Patronage Prestige icons in the tableau wins.
Victory cards:
1.
2.

3.

4.

Imperial victory – have 2 or more kingdom cards (3 or more in a 2
player game) in your tableau than each opponent.
Renaissance victory - have 1 or more republic cards than each
opponent and at least 2 more Law Prestige icons than each
opponent in your tableau.
Globalization victory – have 2 more pawns on the board
(“concessions”) than each opponent and more Discovery Prestige
than each opponent in your tableau.
Holy victory – have most of the Religion Prestige icons in your
tableau for the religion that: a. has more bishops than all other
religions combined and b. has more knights+rooks+pirates in
theocracies on the map than other religions combined.

4.
5.

East Tableau Operations – Activate up to one action per card in your East
Tableau in any order.
West Tableau Operations – Activate up to one action per card in your West
Tableau in any order.
East Trade Fair – add to the East market 1 florin if 1-2 players or 2 florins if 3-4
players, then take 1 florin from the East market. Discard the left, face down card
from the East market. Take the florins on the discarded card, follow the black
route from its origin and give 1 florin to each player whose pawn is met en route,
or to bank when a pirate ship is met, until no florins remain. If florins remain at
the end of the route, add them to the space of the discarded market card. Add a
knight/rook to an empty city in each kingdom that you pass until florins are
finished (you choose the city, the knight/rook is according to the city’s icon). if a
pawn and pirate are co-located in a border, the pawn owner receives the florin,
and the pirate has no effect.
West Trade fair - Same as East Trade Fair, except use West market and white
route.
Announce a victory if the victory card is active and its conditions are fulfilled.

Bishop placement:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Place the bishop on your card on any card in anyone’s tableau that matches your
card’s kingdom.
A bishop placed on a card inactivates all its Tableau Operations, except the
Religious operations (in a blue ellipse), Prestige icons and card abilities.
If a bishop is added to a card with a bishop, both are returned to the supply.
If a bishop is added to a kingdom card with repressed knights/rooks/pawns (and
no bishops), it can remove one of them to the supply.

Tableau Operations
1.

Inquisitor – Move a bishop of the faith on the ellipse left or right without
moving from East to West or vice versa, or move it to a card matching the
kingdom at any tableau.
2.
Commerce – take 1 florin from the card’s matching market (East/West).
3.
Behead – Discard a card from any tableau that matches the kingdom. If a
king card is targeted, place it in its throne, discard the queen if exists, place
vassal cards if exist in their thrones and discard the “behead” card that you
used.
4.
Tax – Allowed only if an empty city (or more) exists in the kingdom. Choose a
pawn bordering a kingdom. The pawn’s owner must either pay 1 florin to the
bank and then add a rook/knight to an empty city according to the city’s
icon, or move the pawn to the kingdom card (repressed).
5.
Repress – move the unit shown on the ellipse that exists in the kingdom to
the kingdom card (repressed). Receive 1 florin from the bank.
6.
Vote – To operate, you have to have the majority of pawns in the kingdom’s
borders, the kingdom card must be in your tableau or in your opponent’s
tableau and you have to pay 1 florin for every unit on the kingdom card
(repressed). If the kingdom card is in your opponent’s tableau, place it in
your tableau with the king side (yellow) face up. If the kingdom card is in
your tableau, turn it from the king side (yellow) to the Republic side (gray).
Optionally, you may change a theocracy status of the kingdom (if exists) into
a neutral status.
7.
Corsair – Move one or two spaces a pirate of the faith on the ellipse and
bordering the kingdom along a trade route to another border of the card's
location, or to a sea border of any adjacent card sharing the same trade route. If
there is a pawn or a pirate of a different color, remove it to the supply. A
pirate cannot move to a space with another pirate of the same color.
8.
Siege – kill a rook, a knight or a pirate in the kingdom.
9.
Campaign – operate it against any adjacent kingdom (inc. diagonal) that you
don’t have in your tableau. Pay 1 florin for each knight in your kingdom to
operate. The attackers in the Campaign: the number of knights in the
attacking kingdom. The defenders in the Campaign: the number of knights
and rooks in the targeted kingdom. Remove an equal number of attackers
and defenders of your choice from the board. If any attackers remain, then
the Campaign is successful (Regime Change).
If you win the campaign, take from the throne or from your opponent’s
tableau the kingdom card. If the kingdom card is taken from the tableau,
take with it the queen, bishop and the repressed units on it. If the
kingdom card is taken from an opponent’s tableau, take with it repressed
rooks/knights/pawns, discard the queen and the bishop on it, if exist. If
the kingdom card taken from an opponent’s tableau is on the Republic
side (gray), revert it to the king side (yellow). The attacking kingdom card
becomes a suzerain and the acquired kingdom card becomes its vassal.
Important: you can attack even if you don’t win a kingdom card to weaken the
targeted kingdom.

One-shot Operations:
First, place the knights/rooks/pawns (bottom of card) on the kingdom’s name on the map.
Then resolve the one-shot operation:
1.

2.

3.

4.

Trade shift – move the disc from the city on the card to the city that begins the trade
route. Move knights/rooks from the city to which the disc was moved are moved to
the kingdom card (“repressed”) at no cost. Operating a trade shift with the Spice Island
requires a Discovery Prestige icon in your tableau.
Coronation – the queen marries one of its suitors on its throne or in your tableau. The
king+queen pair are put on the East/West based on the king. In a regime change, the
queen is discarded. If you cannot or choose not to marry a suitor, the Queen can be
taken as an old maid. Tuck the queen card under your player board with the prestige
icon showing. Old maids are not part of your tableau. You may not perform her ops or
abilities. Old maids are ignored during Apostasy, can be sold, and their prestige icons
count towards victory.
Apostasy – if cards of both Religion Prestige icons appear anywhere on anyone’s
tableau (including yours), all these cards are discarded. Even if the card triggering the
apostasy is discarded, the knights/rooks/pawns on its bottom may be placed in the
kingdom.
Conspiracy – the attackers: knights/rooks/pawns placed on the kingdom’s name + the
pirates bordering the kingdom + the repressed knights/rooks (all of any colour). The
defenders: the number of rooks and knights inside the kingdom. Remove an equal
number of attackers and defenders of your choice from the board. If any attackers
remain, then the Conspiracy is successful (Regime Change).
Then, you may move the knights/rooks from the kingdom’s name to empty cities,
regardless of their city icons, and pawns to the border. Even if there are empty cities
in the kingdom, you can replace existing knights/rooks in cities, move these units to
the kingdom card (“repressed”) and pay 1 florin per repressed knight/rook.
You may move any knights/rooks that were on the kingdom card into the kingdom’s
remaining empty cities. Moving repressed pawns from the kingdom cards to its
borders is optional.
You may add a pawn to a free kingdom border, or replace an existing pawn on a
border that will be moved to the kingdom card (“repressed”) and pay 1 florin to the
bank.
If the kingdom card is taken from the tableau, take with it the queen, bishop and the
repressed units on it. If the kingdom card is taken from an opponent’s tableau, take
with it repressed rooks/knights/pawns, discard the queen and the bishop on it, if
exist. If the kingdom card taken from an opponent’s tableau is on the Republic side
(gray), revert it to the king side (yellow). If the kingdom card is already on your
tableau, turn it to its Republic side (gray) and discard the attached queen and the
bishop on it, if exist. If the kingdom card is a suzerain, return all its vassal cards to
their thrones.

5.

6.

Peasant Revolt - the attackers: knights/rooks/pawns placed on the kingdom’s name + pirates (all of any colour) and your pawns
bordering the kingdom + the repressed pawns (all of any colour). The defenders: the number of rooks and knights inside the
kingdom. Remove an equal number of attackers and defenders of your choice from the board. If any attackers remain, then the
Peasant Revolt is successful (Regime Change).
Then, you may move the knights/rooks from the kingdom’s name to empty cities, regardless of their city icons, and pawns to
the border. Even if there are empty cities in the kingdom, you can replace existing knights/rooks in cities, move these units to
the kingdom card (“repressed”) and pay 1 florin per repressed knight/rook.
You may move repressed pawns from the kingdom cards to its borders. Moving any knights/rooks that were on the kingdom
card into the kingdom’s remaining empty cities is optional.
You may add a pawn to a free kingdom border, or replace an existing pawn on a border that will be moved to the kingdom
card (“repressed”) and pay 1 florin to the bank.
If the kingdom card is taken from the tableau, take with it the queen, bishop and the repressed units on it. If the kingdom
card is taken from an opponent’s tableau, take with it repressed rooks/knights/pawns, discard the queen and the bishop on
it, if exist. If the kingdom card taken from an opponent’s tableau is on the Republic side (gray), revert it to the king side
(yellow). If the kingdom card is already on your tableau, turn it to its Republic side (gray) and discard the attached queen and
the bishop on it, if exist. If the kingdom card is a suzerain, return all its vassal cards to their thrones.
Crusade/Jihad/Reformation (one religion against the two others) - the attackers: knights/rooks/pawns placed on the kingdom’s
name + knights/rooks of the attacking religion in the kingdom + pirates of the attacking religion + knights of the attacking
religion in adjacent kingdoms (inc. diagonal). The defenders: the number of rooks and knights of the non-attacking religions
inside the kingdom. Remove an equal number of attackers and defenders of your choice from the board. If any attackers
remain, then the Crusade/Jihad/Reformation is successful (Regime Change).
Then, you may move the knights/rooks from the kingdom’s name to empty cities, regardless of their city icons, and pawns to
the border. Even if there are empty cities in the kingdom, you can replace existing knights/rooks in cities, move these units to
the kingdom card (“repressed”) and pay 1 florin per repressed knight/rook.
Moving any knights/rooks/pawns that were on the kingdom card into the kingdom’s remaining empty cities and borders is
optional.
You may add a pawn to a free kingdom border, or replace an existing pawn on a border that will be moved to the kingdom
card (“repressed”) and pay 1 florin to the bank.
If the kingdom card is taken from the tableau, take with it the queen, bishop and the repressed units on it. If the kingdom
card is taken from an opponent’s tableau, take with it repressed rooks/knights/pawns, discard the queen and the bishop on
it, if exist. If the kingdom card taken from an opponent’s tableau is on the Republic side (gray), revert it to the king side
(yellow). If the kingdom card is already on your tableau, turn it to its Republic side (gray) and discard the attached queen and
the bishop on it, if exist. If the kingdom card is a suzerain, return all its vassal cards to their thrones.
Change the theocracy of the kingdom using a theocracy card.

Important: you can attack even if you don’t win a kingdom card to weaken the targeted kingdom.

